# Vehicle-Routing-Problem-Using-Metaheuristic-Algorithms-
## Breif Summary :

• **Reduced more than 40%** of traveling cost with **Genetic k-means** algorithm as compared to **Genetic algorithm**
## INTRODUCTION:
**Vehicle Routing Problem** is a generalization of the **Travelling Salesman problem**. There 
are nodes which represent customers/delivery spots/end points and a depot. Each 
customer position is defined on a planar surface and the distance to this point is known. 
The Vehicle Routing Problem (VRP) is a complex combinatorial optimization problem that 
belongs to the NP-complete class.

The VRP can be described as follows: Given a fleet of vehicles with uniform capacity, a 
common depot, and several customer demands, finds the set of routes with overall 
minimum route cost which service all the demands. 
All the itineraries start and end at the depot and they must be designed in such a way that 
each customer is served only once and just by one vehicle

Genetic algorithms provide a search technique used in computing to find true or 
approximate solution to optimization and search problems. However, we used some 
heuristic in addition during crossover or mutation for tuning the system to obtain better 
result which is Genetic K-means algorithm and implemented these two variants’
algorithms in code and compared results. Also studied if Particle Swarm Optimization 
(PSO) could perform better than Genetic algorithm.

## Data collection process 
Data points include the location of both the depot and customer locations. A location 
contains: X – coordinate, Y – coordinate, Demand. Demand at depot is taken zero. 
Data used: 36 nodes including depot

https://drive.google.com/file/d/1mWdgVMsE04vh0MJN9mZeVbQFqhLuYkdm/view?us=sharing


## APPROACHES/ METHODS USED

**1. GRAPH THEORY**
Nodes are customer locations and numbers on arc represent 
distance for a delivery person to travel from one node to another and can find shortest 
path to every node. This can be solved using Dijkstra’s or A* algorithm.
Drawbacks: Due to the nature of the problem it is not possible to use exact methods for 
large instances of the VRP as complexity of using graph theory is n! where n is number 
of nodes.

**2. GENETIC ALGORITHMS** -

Genetic algorithms have been inspired by the natural 
selection mechanism introduced by Darwin.
Steps involved in the algorithm:
Generate Population (Random) 

Fitness function

Selection (Based on Fitness Function) 


**3. GENETIC K-MEANS ALGORITHM** -

This approach tries to work out the initial 
population generation shortcoming of the first genetic algorithm approach. The idea is to 
generate a robust population initially for genetic algorithm to solve the sub-problems 
generated by clustering. Valid sub-solutions can be formed using clusters made by 
ordering nodes in radial order, keeping a constraint to not exceed a vehicle's maximum 
capacity. Now genetic algorithm can be applied to these sub-solutions. Each sub-solution 
will be represented by a chromosome, where each node will be a gene. Genetic operators 
(crossover and mutation) will be applied on the chromosome. Apply partially matched 
crossover and uniform mutation with a pre-decided probability and add children to the 
population for a given number of generations. Update the sub-solution if and only if the 
cost of the new sub-solution is lower than the current sub-solution cost. Repeat the 



On using the data from the link in data collection section, the results for the GA algorithms 
are as below:
Method  

Optimal number of 
vehicles: 3 for Genetic Algorithm and  5 Genetic K-means 
Algorithm

Optimal distance 
travelled:
1702 units for Genetic Algorithm and 956.27 unit Genetic K-means 
process for all sub-solutions **(40% improvement)**





CONCLUSION:


Traditional approaches fail to scale efficiently for large datasets. When we want to 
dynamically update routes computational time matters. Meta heurists like GA and PSO 
scale efficiently. Search is needed almost everywhere at some stage. High exploration 
rate doesn't necessarily generate the best solution.
It was observed that GA when used with clustering give better optimal results. It was also 
observed that PSO convergence rate is high than GA. **GA** and **PSO** are widely used in 
real life applications for routing problems. Eg.: Amazon delivery.
Many domestic and foreign researchers have proposed some improvement methods. An 
improved particle swarm optimization combined with a genetic algorithm (GA-PSO) is 
one. By introducing crossover and variation, the velocity and position updating formula of 
PSO are improved to increase the diversity of the search space and avoid falling into the 
local optimal solution.
